this video is made possible by
Skillshare an online learning community
where you can learn just about anything
support my channel by signing up using
the link below and get your first two
months for free for anyone who thinks
recent us history has never been as
crazy as it is right now allow me to
present to you the 1960s extreme
cultural division major political
assassinations and the closest the world
has ever come to nuclear apocalypse
shocked by the CIA's intrusive methods
for putting down socialism in Latin
America a certain Fidel Castro met with
a certain Che Guevara in a bar in Mexico
City and the two of them decided they
should grow some awesome beards and
overthrow the Cuban government which is
exactly what they did
Cuba had been America's summer
playground and America didn't like
seeing a communist regime being set up
in its own backyard
so the u.s. immediately began training
up cuban exiles to invade Cuba and
overthrow Castro however as the day of
the operation came closer Kennedy wanted
to conceal any US involvement in the
plan so he massively scaled back
American air support and as a result the
Bay of Pigs invasion was a humiliating
defeat for America but Castro felt there
was still an impending u.s. threat to
his regime meanwhile in the Soviet Union
Khrushchev had a lot of medium-range
nuclear missiles that couldn't reach
America but they could if they were
positioned say on an exotic Caribbean
island off the coast of Florida hey I'm
a communist who hates America you're a
communist who hates America you know
what that means we should fall in love I
was just gonna suggest you set your
missiles up in Cuba oh no no you're
right that's a better idea be still my
beating heart
on October 14th 1962 a u-2 spy plane
over Cuba noticed something strange sir
you need a look at this photograph
you're right that's the cutest dog I've
ever seen
sir I was referring more to the Soviet
missiles America freaked out as they
realized what was going on they were
completely vulnerable and they had to
act fast
they knew that air strikes are an
invasion of Cuba would likely mean
nuclear war with the Soviet Union so
Kennedy came up with another idea a
blockade the US Navy announced it would
stop and search any Soviet ships heading
to Cuba and would sink any that did not
comply in response the Soviet put its
military into full combat readiness the
u.s. did the same and began drawing up
plans for an attack on Cuba things were
escalating fast and both superpowers
were getting ready for World War three
emergency communications between the two
sides broke down as crew shot rejected
Kennedy's demands for the missiles to be
removed and for the first time in
history US Strategic Air Command moved
to DEFCON 2 DEFCON 1 means
nuclear war the Soviets shot down a u-2
spy plane over Cuba a Soviet nuclear
submarine in the Caribbean mistakenly
believed war had already broken out and
two of the senior officers gave the
go-ahead to fire its nuclear torpedo
thankfully the third senior officer this
beautiful man refused to authorize the
decision the u.s. finalized its
preparations and I kid you not the day
before the u.s. were set to decide the
day and time for the Cuban invasion
Khrushchev was like hey you know if you
just removed your missiles from Turkey
we'd remove ours from Cuba yeah yeah
that sounds good to me it was a bit more
complicated than that but at the last
second the two sites finally came to an
agreement Soviet missiles were shipped
out of Cuba and the world breathed one
gigantic sigh of relief except for one
guy who was bloody livid whew let's hope
that's the biggest crisis of my
presidency unfortunately for him his
presidency was to end with one having
nearly blown up the planet a few changes
were made first the superpowers agreed
to a limited test ban treaty secondly
the Soviets ousted Khrushchev and
replaced him with Leonid Brezhnev who
was a kisser he liked to kiss both sides
were deeply concerned at the prospect of
nuclear war but still the arms race
raged on throughout the 60s and 70s US
intelligence worked out that the Soviets
nuclear arsenal was not as powerful as
they previously thought but in fact it
was America that held the advantage
ibms and Merv's were developed and the
doctrine of mad if both sides knew
they'd be completely destroyed by a
nuclear war neither would risk starting
one but even without war the world was
already feeling the effects of nuclear
weapons in 1966 above the pleasant town
of Pelham Arison Spain a u.s. bomber
collided with a tanker mid-air and four
hydrogen bombs fell and landed near the
town below it hasn't exploded so I'm
sure everything's fine whoa boy
hey I wouldn't eat that if I were you
okay what were you gonna do today go for
a swim yeah I wouldn't are you breathing
right now yeah yeah I wouldn't it took
the Americans two and a half months to
find one of the bombs which had gone
missing in the ocean this was the 14th
time America had lost a nuclear bomb
since 1950 nobody knows how many bombs
the Soviet Union lost so sleep well
tonight after Kennedy's assassination
vice president lyndon b johnson took
over and he inherited a developing
crisis in the east vietnam back in the
50s the vietnamese had kicked their
french colonizers out once and for all
and the country was divided into two
in the north a communist regime and in
the south and anti communist regime both
were led by very sweet looking old men
but don't let that deceive you
they were both ruthless dictators and
both dreamed of reuniting Vietnam under
their own regime so the North
established the National Liberation
Front also known as the Vietcong to
carry out a campaign of guerrilla
warfare in the south with Soviet support
the u.s. sent advisers to help train the
South Vietnamese to deal with the threat
but president diems brutal policies
pushed more and more South Vietnamese to
support the Vietcong and over the next
decade the situation escalated to a
breaking point America feared the domino
effect that is if South Vietnam fell to
communism would Cambodia be next then
Laos Thailand Burma India LBJ had to
make a choice between losing South
Vietnam or sending in the troops and so
in they went from 1965 America found
itself in a war unlike anything it had
ever fought before let's play spot the
Vietcong soldier did you see him of
course not that's because millions of
young American men were drafted and sent
to fight a ruthless enemy who used the
thick jungle as its shield it was nearly
impossible to tell where the enemy was
or worse who it was and as a result the
civilian population got caught up in the
brutal crossfire
the city of Saigon found itself under
regular attack and America launched a
bombing campaign in the north during
Operation Rolling Thunder
the Vietcong used the Ho Chi Minh Trail
running through Laos and Cambodia to
supply the campaign it was a long and
brutal war and I could never do it
justice in this video but in terms of
the Cold War Vietnam was probably the
biggest of many many global conflicts
that signaled a turning point under the
threat of nuclear war the two
superpowers began working to make their
relationship more constructive and as a
result their ideological battle shifted
away from the potential of direct
conflict and more towards attempting to
influence smaller proxy wars around the
world in the Middle East the Soviet
Union provided aid against Israel during
the six-day war and then again when the
US backed Israel during the Yom Kippur
War in Africa the Angolan Civil War saw
u.s. supported South Africans fighting
soviet supported cubans in the conflict
between Somalia and Ethiopia the
superpowers interestingly switched sides
as regimes changed and the u.s.
continued fighting the spread of
communism in its own backyard
funding the famous contra groups to
fight the socialist Hunta in Nicaragua
these
see wards were fierce enough to begin
with but superpower intervention
amplified the destruction and created
alarming levels of human suffering
throughout the third world and in
Vietnam that human suffering was all
being broadcast back home by a good old
television going into the late sixties
America was a changing nation this
became this this became this and this
became this the new slogan that was
taking root make love not war
the majority of Americans did not
approve of Johnson's handling of the
Vietnam War and in 1968 a silent
majority elected law and order candidate
Richard Nixon as the Vietnam War
appeared to be increasingly unwinnable
and public opinion turning increasingly
sour Nixon made the decision to begin
bringing the troops home and ended u.s.
involvement in Vietnam by 1973 two years
later the south fell the Cold War was
now taking its toll on both superpowers
in Russia a huge percentage of the
budget was still going to the military
people were still hungry and they just
didn't have access to the same lifestyle
and goods as the West and what did they
have to show for it they weren't even
winning the space race anymore both
sides needed to reduce spending in order
to rescue their economies and so both
welcomed with open arms and easing of
hostilities otherwise known as they
taunt to improve relations Nixon became
the first u.s. president to visit Moscow
in 1972 and Brezhnev returned the
gesture a year later a number of
treaties were signed including the 1972
salt agreement that limited nuclear
weapons relations with China were even
improving by a ping-pong diplomacy when
the u.s. table tennis team went on a
tour of the People's Republic
however internally China was still
pushing anti-capitalist propaganda which
led to some mixed messages
Nixon even visited China in 1972 and it
was a barrel of laughs today the
president walks among priceless
treasures from China's Golden Age among
them a pair of ear Stoppers used by the
Emperor to keep from hearing criticism
[Music]
give me a parrot
[Laughter]
everything was going great for Nixon
until it was uncovered that back home he
was being a very naughty boy and
violating constitutional protocol I'm
announcing today my resignation as
president and I'm passing the office to
my vice president Gerald Ford Wow
you mean in America that people can
actually remove their leader when he
breaks a law why not just rule by force
where's the corruption and my first act
as president is to pardon Nixon there it
is
after the whole fiasco Americans decided
what they really wanted was just a nice
safe guy who wouldn't cheat on them so
they elected Jimmy Carter and the two
sides met in Vienna where they signed
yet another strategic arms limitation
treaty it's an honor premier Brezhnev
likewise President Carter please don't
do that but that's not to say there was
no longer any tension between the two
sides because there was heaps of it once
again the Soviet Union put down further
attempts at reform and rebellion in the
Eastern Bloc
the euro missile crisis on new and
improved classes of intermediate-range
missiles being deployed in Europe in
1979 the Soviets thought it would be a
good idea if they had their own Vietnam
and invaded Afghanistan to prevent a
u.s. sponsored Islamic insurgency and in
response to these various crises Olympic
Games were boycotted conservatives were
concerned that US policy had become too
soft and in 1980 they decided they
wanted a president who would be tough on
communism so they elected Ronald Reagan
and Reagan came in guns blazing
concerned that the Soviet Union's human
rights violations he made his speech
calling them an evil empire and he also
wanted to renew the arms race using
technological advances in computing and
lasers he came up with the space Defense
Initiative also known as Star Wars which
was basically a big defensive anti-nuke
shield around the country but a lot of
people thought it was a pretty dumb idea
the Soviet Union perceived the shift in
rhetoric as the USA getting ready for
war and they were feeling especially
threatened as their relationship with a
communist ally China had broken down
relations took a big hit in 1983 when
the Soviets shut down a Korean airliner
that had strayed into their airspace and
it looked like the world was going right
back to mid 20th century Cold War
tension but then Brezhnev got really old
and died and was replaced by this guy
who was really old and died and was
replaced by this guy who is really old
and died and he was replaced by Mikhail
Gorbachev coming into office in 1985 he
was the real game-changer
his philosophy differed a lot from
previous Soviet leaders he felt that the
reason the Soviet system and economy
struggling was that it didn't allow the
Soviet people to find satisfaction in
their work because they weren't allowed
to speak freely and lived in fear
Gorbachev wanted the Soviet people to be
happy but unlike previous Soviet leaders
he actually made the change happen
within the first couple of years he
began the political movement for more
openness and transparency and the
restructuring of the Soviet political
and economic systems and changed very
quickly took effect people could
criticize the government they could
enjoy Western pop culture the media
interviewed Margaret Thatcher but most
importantly the Soviet people can now
enjoy Pizza Hut all hail to garbage ha
he also knew that the arms race needed
to end in order to rescue the Soviet
economy and a positive relationship with
the West must be established
constructive dialogue reopened and
resulted in the INF treaty which saw all
intermediate-range missiles eliminated
which was huge Reagan's tone towards the
Soviet Union began to soften and things
were looking up but what would these
reforms mean for the Eastern Bloc for
decades the Soviets had been brutally
suppressing any attempt at change now
would they be allowed and that was the
exact question on Hungary's lips when
the Prime Minister visited Moscow
Gorbachev's response he didn't
necessarily agree with the reforms but
he wouldn't stop them either he was
prepared to let the Eastern Bloc choose
its own future
this was massive and the Hungarian
leaders began planning free multi-party
elections Poland followed suit and also
held elections in June the anti Soviet
party solidarity one ninety-nine out of
a hundred seats in the Senate but not
just that in Hungary the barbed-wire
border between East and West was removed
the Iron Curtain was unraveling but not
all Eastern Bloc leaders were happy
notably East Germany was still ruled by
a hard-line Stalinist Erich Honecker and
many East Germans were still eager to
get out they had been trapped by the
Berlin Wall but now they were doing the
math if they could travel to Hungary and
Hungary's border with the West was
loosening could they now make it to the
West that summer
East Germans decided hungry was the
latest top holiday destination they
traveled there in droves and using
various methods tens of thousands
crossed the border into Austria and the
West
Honaker was furious and blocked travel
to Hungary but that civil liberties
train had started rolling and it wasn't
stopping
thousands more flocked to the West
German Embassy in Prague where they
stormed the fence around the embassy
gardens and a temporary refugee camp was
set up in September deals were struck to
allow the refugees to travel west by a
train back in East Germany the people
running on a civil liberties hi and they
wanted their next hit dissent was
growing over time demonstrations turned
to mass protests with plain clothes
secret police officers doing their best
to put down the dissent but it had grown
well out of their control and worse the
biggest demonstration was yet to come
we're gonna put all of this down by
force right guys guys unfortunately
everyone had realized what he had not
this was bigger than them and the entire
East German Politburo voted him out of
power on November 4th over half a
million East Germans took to the streets
of East Berlin for many there was still
one big target left in their sights that
damn wall the pressure on the East
German government was too great and on
November 9th
they made a bit of a chaotic
announcement that the travel ban between
East and West was being lifted the
change wasn't meant to take effect until
the next day and crossing guards still
had orders to shoot on sight any who
tried to cross but that night huge
crowds gathered at the crossing points
and the guards were overwhelmed in an
astronomically historic moment after
decades of family separation and travel
restriction the people were allowed to
pass through East and West Berliners
couldn't believe it and celebrated
together throughout the night some even
climbed the wall and began to topple it
the iron curtain had fallen and a year
later Germany would be reunited
elections in Bulgaria a peaceful
revolution in Czechoslovakia and a
violent one in Romania brought to an end
communist Authority in the Eastern Bloc
America decided it would be best if it
just stayed away and let the change
happen as the anti-communist movement
continued all the way back to Moscow
Gorbachev had given the people that
freedom to demonstrate now they
demonstrated for an end to the Communist
single-party rule and Gorbachev had to
give in for the first time in history
elections were held in which candidates
not officially endorsed by the party
were allowed to run ambitious rival of
Gorbachev Boris Yeltsin led a growing
democratic movement now things do get
quite confusing and the dissolution of
the Soviet Union is a complicated topic
so believe me this is oversimplified but
it went a little bit like this the
Soviet Union was made up of a number of
smaller Soviet republics the largest of
which was Russia Yeltsin got himself
elected the President of Russia and
began a struggle for sovereignty against
Gorbachev and the greater Soviet Union
communist hardliners were horrified at
what Gorbachev was allowing so they
briefly kidnapped him and tried to set
up their own emergency government but
Yeltsin and his supporters
around the White House in Moscow and
were like no we have a tank so the
hardliners had to concede and released
Gorbachev Wow
thanks Boris that was a close one no
problem and thanks to you for all the
great freedom you've given us any time
pal and just to inform you I've used
that freedom you've given us to go
behind your back and make a deal with
Ukraine and Belarus to dissolve the
Soviet Union and set up the Russian
Federation in other words you're no
longer in charge I am
dude
so uncool and so decades of tension and
the everlasting threat of nuclear war
finally came to an end as democratic
governments were established and many of
the old Soviet republics and the world
got along together forever after right
guys
hey this modern art thing is growing on
me where can I learn to do that
Skillshare Skillshare is an online
learning community with classes and
design technology business and more
learn how to code your own games and
apps learn a musical instrument learn
how to animate videos like mine learn
Japanese premium membership gives you
unlimited access to all of these classes
and more and better yet everything is
taught by genuine experts working in
their field Skillshare is also more
affordable than other learning platforms
with an annual subscription being less
than $10 a month what's that you wish
you had an exclusive deal just for
oversimplified viewers well wish no more
my friend the first 500 people to use
this link which can be found in the
description below will get their first
two months for absolutely free plus
you'll be supporting my channel and
keeping these videos coming so be sure
to use the link in the description box
below and learn something new today
you
[Music]